hi everyone my name is Dr Mark enson
welcome to heal NPD so I wanted to
address what appears to be a common
misunderstanding I've seen numerous
comments on my channel by viewers who
are somehow under the impression that
pathological narcissism and NPD are not
forms of mental illness here's a brief
sampling
so I found myself correcting these
misconceptions often enough that I
decided to go ahead and make a video
that explains why pathological
narcissism and NPD are absolutely forms
of mental illness and should be treated
as
[Music]
such
there are several ways that we might
conceptualize the term Mental Illness
but I thought it might be simplest to
consult the American Psychiatric
association that's the main Professional
Organization of psychiatrists in the US
and it's also the largest psychiatric
organization in the world the APA
publishes the diagnostic and statistical
Manual of mental disorders or DSM and
that's the standard classification of
mental disorders used by all mental
health clinicians in the United States
according to the American Psychiatric
association mental illness refers
collectively to all diagnosable mental
disorders and we find diagnosable mental
disorders in the DSM and that includes
personality disorders like NPD so by
definition NPD is a mental illness
because it is a diagnosable mental
disorder boom I still got it now I could
stop there but I also want to discuss
the other ways that NPD fits the
description of mental illness as
provided by the American Psychiatric
association they go on to say that
mental illness is any condition that
involves significant changes in thinking
emotion and or behavior and distress and
or problems functioning in social work
or family activities individuals with
NPD are subject to periods of
unrealistically positive self-esteem
where they may feel they're perfect
Flawless or of near infinite
capabilities these episodes are often
accompanied by marked changes in
behavior that include temporary
extraversion expansiveness taking on
more responsibilities than the person
can reasonably handle idealizing others
or devaluing them treating others with
contempt or disdain angry or entitled
outbursts substance abuse and infidelity
now individuals with NPD may also Al
experience periods of unrealistically
negative self-esteem according to the
dsm5 TR that is the most recent edition
of the DSM their self-esteem is almost
invariably fragile they struggle with
severe internal self-doubt
self-criticism and emptiness that's on
page
761 now I'm quoting directly from the
DSM low self-esteem with inferiority
vulnerability and sustained feelings of
Shame envy and humiliation accompanied
by self-criticism and insecurity can
make individuals with narcissistic
personality disorder susceptible to
social withdrawal emptiness and
depressed mood High perfectionist
standards are often associated with
significant fear of exposure to
imperfection failure and overwhelming
emotions that's on page
762 in the context of severe stress and
given the perfectionism often associated
with narcissistic personality disorder
exposure to imperfection failure and
overwhelming emotions can evoke suicidal
ideation that's on page
763 now as you can see NPD involves
significant changes in thinking emotion
and behavior it also involves distress
and or problems functioning in social
work or family activities so not only is
NPD a mental illness by definition
because it's a diagnosable mental
disorder in the DSM I still got it it's
also a mental illness because it meets
both of the apa's other criteria for
mental illness and really what else
would you call a condition that causes
distortions in self-image and
self-esteem that are so severe that the
person experiences functional impairment
across multiple areas of life and that
can ultimately lead to suicide if that
isn't an example of mental illness then
I honestly don't know what would be okay
so that's NPD but what about
pathological narcissism is pathological
narcissism also a form of mental illness
well the answer is yes and here's why
pathological narcissism is the broad
term that describes difficulty
maintaining a positive realistic
self-image accompanied by deficits in
effective coping when threats to
self-image are encountered now that
definition is lifted directly from the
research literature pathological
narcissism is the umbrella term that
describes unhealthy narcissism that is
when a person is having trouble with
their self-image and their
self-esteem narcissistic personality
disorder is one diagnosable instance of
pathological narcissism it's the main
one we think of because it's a
personality style that's defined by
pathological narcissism but pathological
narcissism can show up in many other
mental disorders as well for example
major depression often involves negative
distortions in self-image including
feelings of worthlessness low
self-esteem and problems coping with
these issues we could therefore say that
some cases of major depression involve
pathological narcissism we also find
pathological narcissism in other
personality disorders besides NPD since
many of them also involve distortions in
self-image we sometimes find
pathological narcissism in bipolar
disorders that feature depressive
episodes where the person feels wor less
and incapable or manic episodes where
the person's self-image is distorted in
a positive direction and they experience
periods of grandiosity and we also find
pathological narcissism in psychotic
disorders where the individual sometimes
experiences delusions of grandeur where
they may feel that they're the most
important person alive or that they're
literally a God on Earth while
pathological narcissism is not itself a
diagnosable disorder it still meets the
other two criteria for mental illness
established by the American Psychiatric
association as such pathological
narcissism is very much a form of mental
illness boom so I hope that clears up
any confusion out there about this issue
as always please leave questions
comments or suggestions for future
videos below and until next time take
good
[Music]
care